.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" "verbatim" environment (from strace.1)
.de CW
.sp
.nf
.ft CW
..
.de CE
.ft
.fi
.sp
..
.\"
.TH faked 1 "17 June 2004" "Debian Project" "Debian GNU/Linux manual"
.\" Manpage by J.H.M. Dassen <jdassen@debian.org>
.\" and Clint Adams
.SH NAME
faked \- daemon that remembers fake ownership/permissions of files
manipulated by fakeroot processes.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faked
.B [\-\-debug] [\-\-foreground] [\-\-cleanup] [\-\-key
.IB msg-key ] 
.B [\-\-load] [\-\-save-file
.IB save-file ]
.B [\-\-port
.IB TCP-port ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
If a fakeroot process wants to change the ownership of a file, then
.B faked
is the process that remembers that new owner. If later the same
fakeroot process does a stat() for that filename, then the libfakeroot
wrapped stat() call will first ask faked for the fake ownership etc
of that file, and then report it.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Print debugging information on stderr.
.TP
.BI \-\-foreground
Don't fork into the background.
.TP
.B \-\-cleanup \ number
Cleanup the semaphores.
.TP
.B \-\-key \ key-number
Don't allocate a new communication channel, but use channel specified
by key. (If the specified channel doesn't exist, it's created).
.TP
.B \-\-save\-file \ save-file
Save the environment to save-file on exit.
.TP
.B \-\-load
Load a previously saved environment from the standard input.
.TP
.B \-\-unknown\-is\-real
Use real ownership of previously-unknown files instead of setting them to
root:root.
.TP
.B \-\-port \ tcp-port
Use TCP port tcp-port.

.SH BUGS
None so far. Be warned, though: although I've written quite a few much
larger (and smaller) programs, I've never written anything that was
as tiny as
.BR fakeroot ,
had as many bugs as
.BR fakeroot ,
and still was as usable as, say, 
.BR fakeroot
version 0.0_3, the first version that could be used to build itself.
.SH COPYING
.B fakeroot
is distributed under the GNU General Public License.
(GPL 2.0 or greater).
.SH AUTHORS
.TP
joost witteveen
.RI < joostje@debian.org >
.TP
Clint Adams
.RI < schizo@debian.org >
.TP
Timo Savola
.SH MANUAL PAGE
mostly by J.H.M. Dassen 
.RI <jdassen@debian.org> 
mods/additions by joost and Clint.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fakeroot (1),
.BR dpkg-buildpackage (1),
.BR debuild (1)
.BR /usr/share/doc/fakeroot/DEBUG
